Functional connectivity
=======================

Resting-state fMRI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Resting-State Functional Connectivity (RSC) is a kind of study that indicated the significant correlation of signal between functionally related brain
regions in the absence of any stimulus or task stimulus or task. This correlated signal arises from spontaneous low-frequency signal fluctuations (SLFs). A
lot of the time series of voxels correlated significantly (after filtering the fundamental and harmonics of respiration and heart rates) while only a few
voxel time courses (< 3%) correlated with those in regions outside of the motor cortex. Subsequently, there are some evidence indicated that the presence of
RSC in sensory cortices, specifically auditory and visual cortices. In a study, signal from visual cortex voxels during rest was used as a reference and
correlated with every other voxel in the brain. A significant number of voxels from the visual cortex passed a threshold of 0.35, while only a few voxels
from outside the visual cortex passed the threshold. some similar results also appear in the auditory cortex.

The history of Resting-State Functional connectivity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Experiments with fMRI focused primarily on mapping the BOLD response to sensory and motor stimuli as neuroimaging became more widely employed in the early
1990s. The reaction of the visual cortex to a flashing checkerboard, for example, was observed early on (Kwong et al., 1992), as were the responses of the
primary sensory areas to auditory, tactile, and finger pressures. These tests were simple, but they were crucial for proving the validity of fMRI as a
non-invasive imaging technology.

With these preliminary findings, researchers began looking into the source of the BOLD signal as well as the causes of noise. It was recognised that the
signal obtained from the BOLD response was minimal in comparison to the noise that surrounds it; noise generated not only by the scanner itself (in the form
of "scanner drift"), but also by physiological causes such as respiration and blood circulation throughout the brain. Bharat Biswal scanned people while they
were undertaking a task and while they were not doing a task to better understand these physiological sources of noise.

Even after removing the physiological sources of noise from the resting-state data, Bharat Biswal was surprised to find that they did not account for all of
the variance in the BOLD response. Biswal retrieved the time-series from the left motor cortex and correlated it with the time-series of all other voxels
after noticing what appeared to be temporal correlations between distinct regions of voxels. There was a high association with the time-series of the
opposite hemisphere's motor cortex, rather than the random correlations that one would predict if there were no regular BOLD fluctuations at rest. In other
words, It suggesting that these two functionally equivalent regions generated identical patterns of activity even at rest, though the two areas being
spatially separated.

Several other researchers looked into whether these resting-state patterns could be seen in other parts of the brain a few years following Biswal's finding.
Because the motor cortices appeared to be highly associated, it was expected that other bilateral structures, such as the visual and auditory cortex, would
also be highly connected. And if these functionally comparable regions were associated during a cognitively demanding task, it was claimed, then other
functionally similar regions should be correlated during rest as well.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Content

   running_python/running_with_python.rst

