Ballon data
===========

Casino owner would very interested in study risky behavior. So

Balloon analog risk task. a xperimental paradigms in which participants can manipulate the Ballon to control the risk and reward. To better understand the neural basis of naturalistic risk-taking, Tom Schonberg and his colleagues scanned participants using fMRI while they completed the Balloon Analog Risk Task, an experimental measure that includes an active decision/choice component. In this task, escalating risk-taking occurs under uncertainty and might be experienced either as the accumulation of greater potential rewards, or as exposure to increasing possible losses (and decreasing expected value). 

..  image:: FSL_Ballon_1.PNG

  In the BART (pictutr above), subjects inflate simulated balloons, and accrue monetary rewards for each successive “pump” during a particular trial. A trial is defined as a balloon that can be pumped a certain number of times and the trial can conclude in two different ways. First, the participant may “cash-out” at any point during the trial and secure the cumulative winnings up to that point for that balloon in theircumulative total “bank.” Second, a balloon may explode; in this case, participants would lose the money accumulated on that trial alone (but not the total accumulated during previous cash-out trials). Each trial began with a balloon displaying a value of $0.25 and the value of the balloon increased by $0.25 for each successive pump. An explosion did not affect the cumulative total earnings from previous cash-out trials, which was displayed at the bottom of the screen at the end of each trial. During each trial, participants were presented with one of three types of “reward” balloons, each having a different explosion probability and signified by a different color: red, green, or blue. The maximum number of pumps allowed during each trial was determined by drawing a random number from a uniform distribution with maximum values of 8, 12, and 16, respectively. As a control task, participants intermittently inflated a gray “control” balloon (maximum 12 pumps) that did not explode and had no associated monetary value. The participants were instructed to inflate the control balloon until it disappeared from the screen, and the next trial began. Unlike with reward balloons, participants had no control over how many times they could inflate the control balloon before the trial ended. The order in which trials were presented was randomized among these four balloons
